25 years tables gift to America shortly
before the September 11 Commission made
its report public today a citizens group
released a critique of that report this
briefing by 911 citizens watch is one
hour welcome first I'd like to take a
moment to thank c-span for covering our
press conference today also our thanks
go out to the National Press Club we're
hosting the event and to our club
sponsor John Edward Hurley so thank you
for being here and taking note of the
work of 9/11 citizens watch thank you
especially to all our fellow researchers
investigative journalists and supporters
who've contribute in one fashion or
another to our parallel investigation of
9/11 and the concurrent oversight of the
National Commission on terrorists acts
upon the United States otherwise known
as the 9/11 Commission we've done this
over the past year and a half my name is
Kyle hence I'm co-founder with John
Judge of 9/11 citizens watch you'll find
our BIOS in your press kits and those of
our guest speakers here today you can
find us on the web at WWF and citizens
watch org first a brief history about an
organization we founded citizens watch
March 31st of last year 2003 in New York
City at the time and place of the very
first hearing held by the 9/11
Commission we came together with a
mission to monitor the work of the 9/11
Commission and that of a growing
community of independent truly
independent researchers and
investigators who have been closely
examining the events of and surrounding
the attacks of 9/11 in so doing we've
identified emerging evidence evidence
neglected in large part by the 9/11
Commission that one this Commission is
anything but independent to its
integrity has been deeply compromised
due to a failure to apply a high
investigative standard play hardball and
demand accountability of
military officials and if Democrats and
Republicans alike
and three and perhaps most importantly
the unsubstantiated simplistic official
story offered us for what happened does
not stand up under scrutiny and further
we've denta fide considerable prima
facie evidence though largely
circumstantial should still lead any
prudent investigator or prosecutor worth
his salt to seriously allow for at least
the possibility of a wider circle
complicity than the 19 identified by the
Justice Department immediately after
9/11 that there was perhaps inside
facilitation funding or even
implementation of the attacks by
as-yet-unidentified co-conspirators this
for us is the elephant in the room a
body of evidence that many fear
acknowledging even looking at and
understandably confronting it is our
challenge now all of us to speak out and
bleed and lend the highest degree of
scrutiny to the commission's report
that's coming out today and to this
growing body of evidence compiled by
independent investigators and the
witnesses and witnesses largely ignored
to date so now with the Commission
having concluded as public hearings and
their issuance of the final report today
our work truly begins in earnest we are
plea to see that such interest in the
prelude to our final report this one
dealing mostly with process this the
final report issued before 9/11 of this
year will be more a substantive analysis
once we've had a chance to review the
Commission's final report given the
catalogue of compromises flawed premises
conflicts of interest unanswered
questions neglected areas of inquiry and
ignored whistleblowers we have drawn a
most reasonable and fully justified
conclusion that the report being
released today by this so-called
independent commission cannot possibly
be defamed deemed definitive or
authoritative as an account for the
events of September 11th not by any
stretch of the imagination and given the
resistance obstructions foot-dragging by
the White House and other government age
sees through the course of the
investigation particularly by NORAD the
Department of Justice it is clear that
most of the professionals and officials
in positions of responsibility at the
time of 9/11 would have preferred no
investigation whatsoever into the murder
of 3,000 people from over 80 nations but
alas they got one when the victim
families members fought long and hard
for unfortunately we expect that they
will what they will get in the end is a
whitewash and when most Americans we
feel should greet as a farce and
out-and-out cover-up and a shameful
colossal spin job
let us mince no words our final purport
drawn from a variety of sources will
release substantiate these strong words
and challenge to the work of this
commission the first our first report
given the fact that we have not yet seen
the Commission report is primarily a
detailed critique of the deeply fraud
investigative process itself and deals
primarily with the first two points I
just mentioned leaving the disturbing
analysis and implications of later
probing report focusing on more
substance and content now I'd like to
turn to co-founder citizens watch John
judge who will shed some light and and
share with us some specific details
contained in our report being released
today John judge
morning we have prepared this citizens
critique of the Commission's process and
it's fairly clear to us that the process
haven't been flawed that we anticipate
that the report that issues from the
Commission will be similarly flawed
compared to other investigations of
major historical incidents like Pearl
Harbor the assassination of John F
Kennedy or the shuttle Challenger this
Commission was from the beginning
minimally funded and pushed into a very
tight timeslot compared to most of those
other investigations and that forced it
into we believe a rush to judgment it
did get an extension of time and wanted
to go to January of next year and got
two more months and finished its work
within a schedule that had more to do
with the elections we believe then had
to do with the the investigation and the
probative questions themselves
it took its cues from the joint inquiry
by the House and Senate intelligence
committees but they set a premise of an
intelligence failure and that was their
focus and this Commission followed in
those footsteps in large part and it was
funded founded with the law and that put
obstacles in its way as well
from our point of view as well as being
obstructed from its inception by the
White House and the executive agencies
and there were serious compromises made
with those agencies in terms of how they
would get testimony what documents they
would have access to all sorts of
conditions on whether or not particular
people would testify and what record
will be made of those testimonies over a
thousand people have been interviewed we
are told most of them not under oath in
the beginning none of their public
testimony was taken under oath until
families and citizens watch and other
groups complained and we have no idea
what the recording of that will be for
instance we're told that condo leases
rice rice is for our private testimony
with the Commission there is no record
no recording no transcript and only
notes that survived the Commission was
also
caught in a conundrum that many
investigations are in the current period
that in order to for the national
security state to investigate any major
incident
it can only vet those people that are
already part of that system in large
part to take a look at that system
because they're the only ones in this in
the society that are allowed to see into
it
and so there was there was no one put on
the commission from a totally
independent position of family members
put on there and some of the people had
conflicts or potential conflicts of
interests that concerned the families
and and the citizen groups chairman
Thomas Thomas keen had financial ties
with Amerada Hess oil and at one point
was in a in a joint operation with with
Osama bin Laden's brother-in-law and he
was also connected with the National
Endowment for democracy which has taken
over historically from the USAID in
terms of carrying on covert operations
on behalf of US intelligence agencies
abroad similarly other members were
parts of earlier flawed investigations
into conjugating Watergate they sit on
military Pentagon and intelligence
advisory boards for the most part they
have they have ties into the past
including the the Nixon resignation
period one of them was even accused by
students of being deep throat in the
Watergate situation and their executive
director was so conflicted that the
families called for his resignation and
his work on the Kennedy tapes on the Bay
of Pigs was so sloppily done that the
director of the Kennedy Center said that
no scholar student could rely on him and
yet we have to rely on the notes that he
took at the presidential hearing in
terms of what we're going to do
he was co-authored a book with
Condoleezza Rice it came to the family's
attention that he was part of the
transition team into the bush house for
the National Security Council in
addition to that the flawed premises of
the other report we believe will go
nowhere outside the official story for
instance one of the investigative teams
was called alt al-qaeda and the Qataris
plot
it wasn't called who's behind 9/11 it
named the suspect in the beginning of
its investigation and the procedures
that the Commission followed involved a
lack of transparency an inability to
bring forward or willingness to bring
forward alternative witnesses or points
of view even on public policy issues a
process that left a lack of
accountability of the people in the
government agencies and that suffered
under the excessive secrecy of the Bush
administration with evidence some
evidence destroyed and much evidence
concealed and to date no release of non
classified evidence to back up the
claims of the report there are several
key omissions and contradictions in the
report we believe from the testimony
that we've seen and the public
statements of the staff and some of the
major areas that we think are not going
to be covered are the historical context
in Afghanistan and the u.s. covert
operations there and what led into the
roots of the al-qaida that the the
background on even the suspects
themselves has not been clarified their
identities or what a letter who might be
the actual sponsors of the event the
foreknowledge and for warnings that were
given were not taken into serious
account at the at the hearings at least
in addition to that the response of
NORAD and FAA they had two hearings out
of 19 on this topic
and left with a timeline that still is
muddled and contradicts the earlier
timeline and doesn't make sense in terms
of responses to just give you one
understanding in relation to that they
keep talking about this was a hijacking
and they were waiting to hear if it was
a hijacking and until they found that
out that planes didn't go up to scramble
it was an unprecedented event it was
planes used as weapons which hadn't been
seen before an air emergency begins when
the transponder goes off and the
communication with tower ends it begins
when the plane goes off course it begins
when it doesn't respond to tower
commands that's the point at which flap
goes communication goes back to the FAA
headquarters the liaisons there get get
online with NORAD and plane
go up within six to ten minutes 67 times
in the year prior to this the FAA and
NORAD system worked in that set in that
way in a timely fashion to scramble
planes and air emergencies but work not
at all on November on on September the
11th that that year and another area
that we felt because it's a commission
point of on terrorist acts and could
have included additional terrorist acts
in its scope that it should have
addressed the anthrax attacks an
investigation that's stalled basically
at the foot gate of Fort Detrick
and and hasn't picked up since their
policy recommendations which was the
bulk of their hearings were held and
discussed before the events the day were
clarified so rather than moving from
historical fact to policy the opposite
happened the hearings that they did have
on policy as far as we can see are going
to extenuate and replicate what we think
has been a flawed policy in general of
response to terrorism a domestic policy
international law permanent war economy
and many of the excesses on civil
liberties that followed after 9/11 that
those will not be challenged so that's
some of the points that are made in this
63 page report and as I say we were in
the position of critiquing it before it
comes out so we can't tell you exactly
what's in it but keen had said that not
to expect surprises and that it would
merely fill in a few gaps from what we'd
already seen so we brought our critique
based on watching them very closely over
these months and going to all the
hearings and reading through all the
testimony well thank you John now I'd
like to invite Matthew cielito Matthew
lost his son Matthew Cecil Ito who is 23
years old he worked for Cantor
Fitzgerald Matthew thank you for being
here thank you for letting me come up
because I have to leave here right after
I get done speaking to go to a preview
of the Commission report as a family
member that's involved with the 9/11
families United to bankrupt terror
first I'd like to tell you as a family
member
I think this nation owes a debt of
gratitude to the families of 9/11
because if it weren't for them this
commission would not be here today
i Matthew cielito feel this nation owes
a debt of gratitude to Tom Kane because
I kind of think the administration
thought they were going to get a
whitewash and some people may still
think it's a whitewash but I feel Tom
Kane did a great job and holding the
committee together and getting to the
bottom as far as he could to the test
that was given to them and remember what
the task was find out what happened how
it happened and prevent it from ever
happening again and they gave that
committee a budget of three million
dollars now I'm not from Washington DC
you you people are what is yeah the most
devastating thing that ever happened on
our soil and you're charging a committee
to find out how it won't happen again
and give them a budget of three million
dollars is ridiculous through family
pressure through the press it was gotten
up to 15 million dollars which we again
Oh a debt of gratitude to the families
things that I were disappointed in is
the president who was our leader after
the most dastardly thing on our soil
ever happened had to be forced through
families in the press
to have this committee he had to be
forced to have his cabinet people
testify on this committee he himself
said he would not testify in front of
the committee but through family
pressure through the press he not only
had his cabinet people speak in front of
him but he himself spoke in front of
them the time limit was pushed
why because family members through the
press put pressure on the point is as
the leader of our nation at a time that
9/11 happened I would think that he
would be in the forefront leading and
demanding and giving as much time that's
needed to find out how something like
this is going to be prevented from
happening again one of the disheartening
things that I go through is that again
I'm part of this lawsuit of 9/11
families United to bankrupt terrorism we
have 17 countries cooperating with us
I'll name a few Spain Germany Italy on
and on and on opening up their books
showing us how money was funneled to the
terrorists
yet when we go to our State Department
they will not say one thing to us as
Americans I fought as an American I find
that disheartening I think you as
Americans should find that disheartening
why would the rest of the world want to
cooperate with us and we can't get past
first base with our own State Department
and administration so in conclusion I'd
like to say I think the committee did a
good job
one that
it was given the task of finding out
what happened I think Tom Kane that is
stellar job and I think the families
truly should be admired by the rest of
the country because all we tried to do
you know my son is gone but we as family
members wanted this to happen so your
child your mother your father won't be
taken the next time this happens and
we'll be prepared I want to thank this
group for giving me time to speak and I
thank you very much for listening thank
you very much thank you very much
Matthew Knight now to an introduce on a
27 excuse me I'd like to now introduce
Jules Aronson Jules is also a victim
family member he lost his sister
Myra on flight 11 Jules
no thank you I just have a few few
remarks
obviously I I haven't read the report so
I'm not going to comment about the
contents but what I want to focus on is
is the subject of the climate that may
have led to the 9/11 tragedy that is we
all know now that there are multitudes
in the Middle East in particular the
Muslim world that really really hate us
and I don't think this question has
really been adequately addressed it's it
of course it's important it's important
to do practical things to combat the
terrorism and maybe from a military
point of view but we'll never get rid of
this hatred and this which which
generates many recruits to terrorism
unless we address this question so so
what what is the host what I would like
to hope they committed commission would
have done was to address the historical
content context of the 9/11 tragedy that
is what what what have we done to aid
al-qaeda or its predecessors and as I
said why why do the multitudes of
Muslims really nearly hate us and this
this of course is a complex question I
think unless we look at our policies
both now and what we have done in the
past to to create this climate the war
on terrorism will never end in fact it
looks now with the war in Iraq and that
it's getting even worse and so
you know I think I think the commission
from what I know of the testimony and
probability has done a very good job in
general there there's in I think it
unfortunately in reaching a compromise
they may have missed some critical
points but I but I don't think this
question really has been addressed and I
and I really feel that aside from you
know practical points of you know such
as trying trying to trace the people who
are involved in fostering this terrorism
in 911 that you know if we really had
what we really need to do now is to look
at our policies and our you know and and
what we are doing as a nation to foster
this you know I think I think our
leadership really doesn't understand
other cultures and in so doing this they
are they're really making things worse
so these this is just my my point of
view and I want to thank the members
here and for inviting me
I'd like to bring up now a 27 year
veteran an analyst with the CIA Ray
McGovern
I should make clear although it's
probably clear for my appearance that
I'm retired from the CIA I'm no longer
active work working there there is a
short squib that I wrote it's on the
back of this one which you might miss in
your packet so I'll go lightly over what
that says and just to make a few general
observations I think it's really
important to remember with respect to
the genesis of this report that it was
resisted mightily as John has already
said by the administration
Dick Cheney at first said that if there
were any kind of Commission like this he
the White House might refuse to send
anyone over to testify and then when it
was the pressure grew for some kind of
inquiry into this terrible event he
acquiesced or he and Bush acquiesced and
the appointment of a joint congressional
committee because Cheney saw that he
could control that through his cat's paw
reporter Goss
the head of the House Intelligence
Committee and indeed he did so most
flagrantly when there was a leak not
necessarily from the committee
but Cheney persuaded Gus and Bob Graham
to send the FBI in an unprecedented
violation of the separate of power
separation of powers having the FBI part
of the administrative the executive
branch investigate Committees of
Congress committees by the way
responsible for overseeing the
activities of the FBI so that that's
part of the the background here that I
think we really have to realize is is in
the woodwork all right good thank you
yeah
that committee of course the joint
congressional committee issued its
report its final report at the end of
2002 but when it had the public hearing
in September Eleanor Hill the executive
director a very gutsy lady a very
competent lady formerly Inspector
General the Pentagon stopped all the
proceedings in the beginning and said
now I have to tell you folks something
very important before we proceed and
that is that
negotiations that the white house went
well into the evening and we failed we
failed to get White House and Central
Intelligence Agency approval to mention
anything in this report anything having
to do with what the president was told
prior to 9/11 even if that information
is already publicly available we were
forbidden to include that in our report
okay and indeed when the report came out
at the end of the year not a word on
that continuity look at the Senate
Intelligence Committee report from two
weeks ago
same thing they draw the line at what
the president did with the intelligence
information that he had so this is a
very important point because if you
don't look into this then you know
nobody's responsible Harry Truman said
the buck stops here well that seems to
have been long forgotten by President
Bush who says he really respects Harry
Truman there is no accountability the
president has said that he's never well
he can't recall ever having made a
mistake well let me tell you folks that
settled that filters right down to the
lowest gs3 working in the federal system
and that kind of example is what causes
things like the the incredible
malfeasance and misfeasance that
attended the intelligence and law
enforcement performance having to do
with 9/11 so so don't be taken in all
right what what the what the we already
know enough about what the report says
what it says is that you know there were
mistakes made there were ten missed
opportunities
well parenthetically I would say that
this is the 11th okay this report is the
11th missed opportunity but nobody
really was responsible it was the system
it had to be a system and so what we're
gonna do is we're gonna fix the system
we're tweak it we're gonna in my view
rearrange the director of central
intelligence chair on the deck of the
Titanic and move it up one tier okay
none of that is necessary what you need
is integrity what you need is encount
ability I've seen that the system work
and one of the things that really grates
me is that not one of the commission
members has any intelligence community
experience whatsoever you've heard it
said already and it's true that this is
not an independent commission okay not
only that it's not a representative
commission everyone on that commission
looks exactly like me except one woman a
token woman okay all are either lawyers
or politicians
some are both my grandmother used to
talk about the upper crust well that's
what we have here the ruling class the
royal class reminds me very much of Lord
Hutton and Lord Butler both of all both
of whom ran their own inquiries and came
up with the correct answer the correct
answer being mistakes were made it's a
collective sort of problem that no one
person no one individual is responsible
that leads to disaster as we have seen
the last thing is stress that no one on
the Commission do anything about
intelligence and let me just finish up
by stressing what I think is going to be
very interesting and no one here I think
has read the report yet but in view of
what I've said about information being
prohibited with respect to what the
president knew before 9/11 it's going to
be very interesting to see how the
Commission finesses this problem no it's
it's thoroughly politicized the
Commission that it's it's acutely
partisan so how are they going to parse
this how are they going to to face this
very delicate issue we all know that the
president was given copious warnings
before 9/11 in the spring and summer of
2001 and how are they going to finesse
that with the reality that neither the
president nor his National Security
Advisor
know what to do could he not have
delayed his vacation a day or two could
he not have gotten together with his
national security advisors could they
not have warned the airlines and the
airports in a more definitive way so
it's going to be very interesting to see
how they come out on that but that's
that's that's where the where it hits
the fan and I think that I can predict
very confidently that just as the
British in a very gentle and gentlemanly
sort of due deference professional
courtesy sort of way after all most of
them are lawyers they will come up with
what is indelicately called a whitewash
a last word here and that is that I'm
just delighted that Jules mentioned the
historical context because as is well
known if you wish to combat terrorism
well it's just like you know just like
defeating malaria everyone knows that to
defeat malaria you set up short shooters
around the swamp and you try to kill as
many mosquitoes as you can flying out of
the swamp that's how you defeat malaria
right right well how do you defeat
terrorism folks you don't to feed them
the Rumsfeld way by killing as many as
you can defeat him by asking what makes
these people hate us what makes these
people hate us and it's not our
democracy and it's not our freedom it's
our policy stupid it's our policy
it's our tanks it's our helicopter
gunships that our bulldozing Palestinian
homes
it's our tanks that support Ariel Sharon
the Irish feel real strongly about that
and I would too and that's the that's
the basic one invading Iraq certainly
didn't help and Ariel Sharon is as much
responsible for that decision and his
his supporters in our government as as
is anyone else because as you probably
know if you look closely the so-called
neo cons
have great difficulty distinguishing
between what they perceive to be the
strategic vision the strategic needs of
Israel and the strategic needs of our
country thank you very much thank you
Ray in just a minute we're gonna open up
to questions but I want to acknowledge
the statements that are in your press
kits one from Bill Doyle who lost his
son Joseph has a statement we'll be
posting this on our website for those
who who are interested but an interest
of time we want to turn it over
questions also Judith Jackson Reese sent
us a statement and we want I want to
thank both Judith and Bill for doing so
again we'll post that on our web site
wwhen Swach org I before I turn this
over to questions one last thing we
would like to make a call to any
whistleblowers any members of government
former members of government who have
something to say about the events of
9/11 in response to this Commission to
come forward to the press to our
organization Daniel Ellsberg is running
a project called the whistleblower
project the truth-telling project and he
too is doing the same relative to Iraq
and 9/11 so with that I thank you for
your patience and thank you for being
here and we'll take questions too to all
of us here thank you very much there is
a wireless handheld and if you will wait
for Arielle before asking your question
we'd Mary much appreciate that thank you
very much
Chris strong with the the National
Journal um what what are the maybe the
the three most important class
unanswered questions that you see at
this point based on the research that
you've done that you don't feel that the
91 report is going to answer what are
those questions that you feel that are
not being answered to be that the
American public should know well first
I'd like to reiterate what John raised
and mentioned in the our report being
released today and that is the fact that
they completely excluded an examination
of the anthrax attacks and the reason
why we particularly feel that that was
unwarranted is that on the morning or
rather the day of September 11th someone
had members of the White House staff
Cheney's office I believe at first begin
taking cipro on the morning of September
11th thereby making it an integral part
of the attacks of 9/11 because there
were some intelligence some warning that
was only passed on to White House
officials but not to the postal workers
that were later killed as a result of
the attacks four weeks later that's one
example another one is there's been no
adequate explanation for why it is that
Air Force jet fighters strip alert on
strip alert here in the DC area we're
able to defend the skies here in the
area known as P 56 which is the zone
over the Capitol the White House and so
on the nation's capitol there's been no
adequate explanation we understand that
there were three jets on from Andrews
that were on a an exercise over the over
North Carolina independent of the
simultaneous that were that happening
that day and and yet when I asked this
of Jamie Gorelick there was no comment
so this is an area that I hope the press
will get some scrutiny to so the anthrax
questions about the response from the
Andrews Air Force Base John do you have
any tat
the anthrax matter was a New York Times
article that revealed in what was called
bungling by the FBI or missteps in the
investigation that during the time
between the mailing of the first anthrax
envelopes and the first person who ended
up sick from them down in Florida the
FBI had contacted the University of Iowa
at Ames and in the discussion with them
there was an agreement made to destroy a
70 year old archive of all known strains
of the patent a chiral pathogen anthrax
with it which they had kept there at
Ames and when the DNA work was done on
the anthrax samples they were identified
as Ames strain now had that archive been
kept the DNA could have traced it to a
particular batch or strain and then that
batch would have had a paper trail as to
where that anthrax had been sent for
research either for cure or for
weaponization but also the weaponization
level is so sophisticated that it
clearly led back to us us Amrit or the
Fort Detrick and some other bases
included the primarily Detrick that do
research on bio weapons on September the
9th the day just two days before the
attack the Defense Intelligence Agency
held a press briefing here in DC
announcing that under project Jefferson
and the DIA
they had developed on Rumsfeld's request
the next generation of anthrax
genetically altered more resistant to
antibiotic and more weaponized version
of anthrax which matches what was in
these envelopes and in that
investigation stop there the other major
area the third area that we were
bringing up today it's not the only ones
mentioned are a report but we think it
important is the one that Ray and Jules
were addressing the historical context
of the creation of the Mujahideen and
the covert operation that it represented
and the funding of that operation which
came through both Saudi Arabia and the
United States intelligence agencies and
Pakistani intelligence BCCI the bank for
and commerce international and those
elements were also similarly around the
funding of the other major covert
operation period contra gate and these
were off-the-shelf or clandestine
operations run by William Casey during
the Reagan and Bush years the plan
started actually under Carter and
Britta's insky but that's really what
led to the training camps and the
building up of Islamic militants now
Brzezinski says that he thought it was a
great idea at the time he has no reason
to apologize he said what are a few
startup Muslims compared to the fall of
the Soviet Union but I think some
Americans have an answer to that
question now the other item which is
somewhat related is the the what we feel
is the lack of inquiry hearing from
witnesses relative to $100,000 wire
transfer that was reportedly approved by
the head of the Pakistani intelligence
agency the ISI and that this hundred
thousand dollar wire transfer was made
to otta in advance of the attacks so
this is a trail that we believe Daniel
Pearl was following when which led to
his death his his widow I understand has
asked about this and would like to to
see a Khalid Sheikh Mohammed who is also
tied in with this who allegedly slits
Daniel pearls throat brought brought to
justice but Khalid Sheikh Mohammed on
which the Commission bases much of its
new information has been held in an
undisclosed location now for over a year
and certainly any kind of information
coming from someone who's been held in
an undisclosed location probably
tortured or drugged is a questionable
integrity I'd like to know how many of
you have heard of spike Bowman nobody
spike Bowman was the FBI senior lawyer
who spiked the mini Annapolis Office
initiative to get access to moussaoui's
computer and so forth this was weeks
before 9/11 they had Musa he was one of
the fellows that was training for air
flight flight training in Minneapolis
spike Bowman was the person who refused
permission for them to do that had they
been able to do that before 9/11 rather
than after 9/11 this could have been
prevented this is the clearest instance
that we have now
spike Bowman was given a cash award
signed by the president barely a year
later $20,000 and praised for his
contribution to the security of United
States citizens I want to know why that
happen everyone knows what he did why
did they give him an award barely a year
later there's been a great pattern of
awarding failure in the wake of 9/11 and
as you know I think that their it merits
a deeper look at some of the mounting
body of evidence that suggests a wider
circle of complicity I'm sorry take
another question please I wish you
identify yourself sure
Jeremiah McWilliams with ABC News you
said that the official story for what
happened on 9/11 does not stand up to
scrutiny and early in the report I think
on a related note it seems to suggest
that the official case against Osama bin
Laden is incomplete or weak could you
clarify for us what you mean by the
official story does not stand up to
scrutiny well it starts with the 19
suspects and the problem is okay
the problem there is that the
International Press BBC and other
sources reported that up to seven of the
suspects were still alive based on the
fact that people came forward with the
same ID and name and matching photo
photographs and said that's me it's my
ID but I wasn't on the plane
and so we began with a group of suspects
who are operating on our false ID those
names have never been changed they were
supposedly based on information from the
airline manifests that were released but
I went to those releases very early on
and they do not contain any of the names
of the suspects each manifest is short
four or five names and so we have no way
to match even the airline manifests with
the official story of who the suspects
are if these suspects are carrying other
ID which is not unthinkable in a
criminal situation then how can we rely
on a story of who that ID was in the
past in other words we say this is the
person's name and identity and this is
what they were doing here and there that
ID could also have been passed to other
people so yeah that's a way in a covert
operation that you create what's called
a legend and and you and you can set
somebody up or give blame to somebody or
create false sponsorship for an event so
first of all I would say we don't know
who the people are second their pattern
of activity does not seem to match
people operating in the way they're
supposed to be they're making themselves
very visible there were numerous calls
and complaints about them where they
lived and where they dealt with things
or reports them going to bars and
drinking doing illegal drugs you know
certainly certainly not following a
pattern seems to be devout Muslims but
but rather people a lot of money and a
lot of background and I think there's
also a question you have to consider
about whether it's feasible to get
groups of people over periods of time to
agree to suicide missions one person yes
but even in the Khobar bombing if you
remember two people were in the bombing
truck one jumped out at the last minute
and that's not uncommon in suicide pacts
much less 19 people agreeing to kill
themselves all at once and break a bunch
of people with them and and so what
happened on the planes we still don't
know
and if this is what it appears to be a
very sophisticated covert operation
its sponsorship is going to be covered
by definition from public view and so we
feel that indications that were
mentioned in the joint inquiry report
that there were other countries involved
the 28 pages you may remember that were
redacted so we couldn't know who they
were the wink and nod of Bob Graham that
this was Saudi Arabia and now the denial
that Saudi Arabia was involved no word
of Pakistan or whether it was involved
or whether other countries could have
been involved in this operation I'm just
saying that there's box cutters and
knives the whole story just has a lot of
flaws and a lot of pieces that were
never followed up on and we were also
promised a white paper by Colin Powell
if you remember about the guilt and that
was never given to the American public
was some facts were released to the
British and they said it's not enough to
go to court it's enough to go to war but
I think the case on bin Laden I'm not
saying he's an innocent party but we
really don't have a saw in most of what
we have now linking all these things to
bin Laden is is the testimony of Khalid
Sheikh Mohammed who no one can see
except authorities and no one knows
whether whether he's you know at Abu
gorab where he's being held is he being
tortured are these legitimate
confessions do they actually have Khalid
Sheikh Mohammed there was some question
in the international press about that
when he was arrested so we're having to
base a lot of this on on sources and
investigations that we can't know very
much about and I think that a real
scrutiny of it suggests that you've got
a broader sponsorship here than we're
understanding as yet the the men the
transfer of funds that Kyle mentions is
important because the ISI in Pakistan
was the main conduit of American funds
to the Afghan resistance and so this is
an instance where somebody's passing
money out of Pakistani ISI in August of
2001 - one of the main masterminds of
the plot through international channels
not setting off the normal banking alarm
bills for $100,000 transfer somehow
and in passing it through some
intermediaries and then afterwards he is
removed from his position at the ISI on
his return to Pakistan from the United
States for being too close to bin Laden
and for this transfer while he was here
he met with Colin Powell Richard
Armitage George Tenet at the CIA Porter
Goss and Bob Graham on the morning of
the event and he had clearly ongoing
ties with US intelligence as well we
don't really know when US intelligence
connections to the Taliban two of the
Afghan resistance to the Islamic
militants have started much less ended
and whether or not there are elements
within the US intelligence community
that saw elements within that resistance
as negative assets that they could use
for international purposes that may or
may not have gotten out of control in
the situation
a Billiken affiliated with washington
independent writers of if you each were
putting yourselves in the shoes or the
minds of a terrorist or potential
terrorist what area not properly or
fully answered do you think would give
the enemy the most reason to be relieved
or glad or feeling victorious well I
think
the fact hasn't cracked down on the flow
of the money laundering of drug proceeds
from drug trafficking as was referred to
by Matthew cielito a few minutes ago is
is something that I would think the
terrorists are very happy about because
that would allow them to obviously you
know continue in their efforts I think
in the wake of 9/11 the response of this
country relative to squashing of civil
liberties this assault on the bill of
rights the very foundation of what sets
this country apart that that makes it a
leader you know something too you know
we haven't reached the ideal in terms of
what we've aspired to what the founding
fathers aspired to but I think in the
wake of 9/11 we've seen an erosion of
our civil liberties and we're being
asked to sacrifice them for an illusion
of security it's hard from him put
myself in the mind of a terrorist but
that concerns us as as an organization
the the domestic response to 9/11 the
excessive secrecy
you know the oppression the stifling of
dissent all of these things are
concerning to us if they hate us for our
freedoms which I don't think is the case
certainly they would rejoice over what's
happening in this country
a an analyst of the CIA michael Scheuer
who is still in place by the way and has
anonymously published that book I
suggest you read that because it goes
into chapter and verse as to why if
you're looking at Osama bin Laden how he
feels about what's happened
Sawyer describes it as a kind of
Christmas present that the president
decided to invade Iraq after all that's
where Osama bin Laden's been saying all
along that the u.s. is an imperialist
aggressive nation that hates Arabs will
invade their countries to seize oil so
we prove that when we did did all that
Sawyer says there was a kind of a
Christmas present to Osama bin Laden
the kind of thing where you know you
sort of hope all day that maybe it would
eventually really don't expect it and lo
and behold it happened why do I say that
well of the proof is in the pudding
there is a virtual war going on in Iraq
now if jihad it was sumit bin Laden's
purpose he's got 1 billion 1 billion
Muslim fighters really geared up to
fight the arch imperialists the United
States which has in an unprovoked way
invaded and occupied an Arab country so
I think to the extent you're talking
about bin Laden how he feels about this
I think he's really happy about the way
it seems to be evolving and I think
probably enough said I just close by
saying that you know when our generals
went to Afghanistan to go after the
Taliban harboring bin Laden and there
and al Qaeda getting Osama bin Laden and
these are the words right out of the
generals mouth was never a priority and
as we all know he is still free so next
question please
please I'm Chris
you mentioned the issue of
accountability and that the report is
most likely gonna say if there is an
across-the-board system-wide failure
rather than holding individuals
responsible maybe a question for mr.
McGovern
have you seen anywhere where you see
that there's individual accountability
or at least accountability in certain
agencies over other agencies there was
certainly the Phoenix memo memo the the
Misawa investigation which which went
through the Washington headquarters of
the FBI and apparently wasn't was
blocked right and so what can you say
about where accountability should lie
okay what I'll say is that you're in the
weeds the president was told on August
the 6th and I quote the title of the
president's Daily Brief item bin Laden
determined to strike in United States
this was just the most recent of many
very serious warnings he had a national
security adviser with no experience at
all in this kind of thing it was pretty
much admitted she didn't even read the
file that was left behind so that she
could know what was going on they didn't
you know in my view the charitable
explanation is they just didn't know
what to do okay and so what do they do
he went off on vacation she to the
reports don't take my word for it
see what the Richard Clarke says about
this whole business hair was on fire
George Tenet sear Richard Clarke's here
well I was tenant not summarily
dismissed after 9/11 well because he
almost certainly has this little this
little piece of computer software or
computer he's got a disk on which the 12
warnings that he issued to the president
between July and August of 2001 exists
in other words the president was warned
so getting down to pending
responsibility on the CIA or the FBI
yeah there were terrible mistakes made
but there certainly was enough evidence
there to to require a
some kind of action if only to consult
his advisers at the time and for the
president to say as he did yesterday
that if there were the smallest inkling
that such such an attack might be he
would have moved quote moved heaven and
earth and quote to to prevent it now
that's a nice rhetorical expression but
what we don't want him to move heaven
and earth we just want him to talk to
his advisors and figure out you know
should we be doing something about this
should we alert the airlines you eat
other at the airport one of the points
that's addressed in our report and in a
there are several appendices in the
report but Dan Alcorn and foi attorney
here in town makes the argument that the
excess of secrecy and it's gotten worse
since since 9/11 of the government
actually hinders the ability for us to
be secure to protect ourselves and the
simple point he makes is that not the
details or the sources of the methods
necessary to come up to the conclusion
of the presidential daily briefing which
is held to be secret but just the fact
that bin Laden was determined to strike
inside the United States could have been
made public on August the 6th over a
month before and might have had a much
different effect on the alert of the
agencies instead it was held as some
super secret totally classified document
that no one would ever be able to see
except except George Bush and this sort
of secrecy I think is exactly
counterproductive to not only a
democracy but but to any kind of real
security and we exist in a time where
our history has been buried in the
national security state since 1947
actively with a huge classification
bureaucracy even if you said as Clinton
or Clinton tried to 30 years out
documents should be released by the time
the agencies involved get done vetting
them the the current volume of newly
classified material would catch up but
even that's not enough
bush administration has people going
into the National Archives now and other
collections reclassifying formally
declassified documents it also passed an
executive order that all the papers for
the previous two presidencies Brazil now
reside under the control of the current
president so he currently controls all
the papers of his father's
administration and there was a battle to
get those loose when he left as well as
Clinton's papers and his own and so we
exist in a time of increased secrecy but
very little democratic or citizen
participation in in a in a scenario that
affects all of us on very profound
levels and I think what Rey was trying
to say about terrorism is that this is
exactly the wrong approach to
asymmetrical warfare this kind of
violence is also used as a tactic in
revolutionary situations Castro would go
Bautista Bautista would over respond
making himself enemies and Castro
friends and if you fall into that trap
in your response I mean the two examples
I think you should look at historically
are Ireland and Israel in Ireland when
the conditions improve when there's
amelioration when there's more
representation and democratic input from
people people who are hopeless anymore
they're not in despair then the violent
elements come to the negotiating table
on the other hand if it's just a cycle
of violence you can't get out of it and
the only way to and terrorism in the
world is to eventually restore justice
so in closing again I want to thank you
all for coming I want to thank the
National Press Club c-span Jules Aronson
Matthew cielito Ray McGovern Barry
Zelman he also made a statement I had
forgotten mentioned that we also pasted
his post a statement on our website
again you can visit us at
www.fortuigence.com
and comprehensive report in response to
the 9/11 Commission report being
released today thank you very much
[Music]
you can read the September 11 Commission
report